Comment on Nuclear Fusion 66, 016012 (2026) by Richard Fitzpatrick,
A Simple Model of Current Ramp-Up and Ramp-Down in Tokamaks
Allen H Boozer
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
ahb17@columbia.edu
(Dated: August 25, 2026)
###SECTION###
The paper Nuclear Fusion66, 016012 (2026) by Richard Fitzpatrick is based on fundamental
errors in the physics of the evolution of the poloidal magnetic flux in tokamaks. With the certainty
of Faraday’s Law, the slippage of the poloidal relative to the toroidal flux is given by the loop
voltage. Some of the errors may be endemic to the tokamak community, such as the focusing on
a quantityψthat has a subtle relation to the poloidal flux while essentially ignoring the toroidal
flux. Other errors are due to an entanglement of in principle separable concepts and unjustified
assumptions. Although Nuclear Fusion allowed the use “private communication” as a reference to
bolster misquotes, the response must be in arXiv because Nuclear Fusion will not allow any mention
of “private communication” in a response. This comment also derives a new and simple expression
for the loop voltage, which has the validity of the parallel component of Ohm’s law.
###SECTION###
I. INTRODUCTION
Richard Fitzpatrick’s 2026 Nuclear Fusion paper
[1] on current ramp-up and ramp-down in tokamaks
is based on misunderstandings about the form of
Faraday’s Law in toroidal plasmas, which may be en-
demic within the tokamak community, coupled with
errors due to entangling concepts that in principle
separable and making unjustified assumptions. The
scientific issues in his paper are dealt with in Section
II and even in more detail in my Physics of Plasmas
paperConstraints on the magnetic field evolution in
tokamak power plants[2].
There is a second set of issues that arose from mis-
quotes in the Nuclear Fusion paper [1] and the use
of references to “private communication” to bolster
those misquotes. As discussed in Section III, all the
“private communication” was through emails which
explicitly pointed out the falseness of his quotes
rather than supported them.
The Nuclear Fusion paper [1], which was accepted
on October 14 and published online of November
6, 2025, was Fitzpatrick’s response to a September
9, 2025 arXiv version of my article [3], which was
eventually published by the Physics of Plasmas [2].
However, the initial submission was flatly rejected
on Nov 10, 2025. The first reviewer of [3] stated:
“The discussion of the plasma current ramp-down
is similarly qualitative, and a more rigorous model
was recently published in Nuclear Fusion by Fitz-
patrick, prompted by the arXiv article from this au-
thor.” The Physics of Plasmas required that the
issues raised in the Nuclear Fusion paper [1] be ad-
dressed before the paperConstraints on the mag-
netic field evolution in tokamak power plantswould
receive any consideration.
Without being aware of Fitzpatrick’s submission
and certainly without permission, his Nuclear Fusion
paper [1] was published with references to “private
communication” to buttress incorrect statements of
the views expressed in the arXiv article [3]. Despite
having copies of all of the “private communication”
emails, the journal Nuclear Fusion, as a matter of
policy, will not allow publication of a Comment that
discloses the actual contents of a “private communi-
cation” in order to correct the misstatements. This
comment, which will only be published on arXiv, is
a companion to a comment written for publication
in Nuclear Fusion that only deals with the scientific
issues.
###SECTION###
II. SCIENTIFIC ISSUES
Fitzpatrick’s Nuclear Fusion paper [1] was based
on a misunderstanding Faraday’s Law. Judging by
the exuberance of the reviewer of [3] and the ac-
ceptance and online publication of [1] by Nuclear
Fusion on November 6, 2025, this misunderstanding
may be endemic within the tokamak community. A
fundamental problem is the failure to recognize the
equation
∂ψp(ψt,t)
∂t =V ℓ(ψt,t),(1)
which has the validity of Faraday’s law in toroidal
plasmas in which there are magnetic surfaces. The
toroidal flux is the magnetic flux enclosed by a mag-
netic surface,ψ t =
R ⃗B·d⃗ aφ, and the poloidal flux
is the magnetic flux that passes down through the
central hole in a magnetic surface,ψ p =−
R ⃗B·d⃗ aθ,
Figure 1. The loop voltageV ℓ gives the slippage of
the poloidal relative to the toroidal flux.
The derivation of Equation (A9) in Appendix A
shows that the Ohm’s law for the electric field paral-
lel to the magnetic field,E|| =ηj||−jbs−jcd, implies
arXiv:2601.05977v4  [physics.plasm-ph]  24 Aug 2026

FIG. 1: The toroidal fluxψ t is the magnetic flux en-
closed by a toroidal magnetic surface. The poloidal flux
ψp(ψt,t) is the magnetic flux going down through the
hole in the center of the toroidal magnetic surface. The
toroidal current isI(ψ t,t) is the current enclosed by the
magnetic surface. The poloidal currentG(ψ t,t) is the
current coming up through the hole in the center of the
toroidal magnetic surface. The current density in the
figure is denoted by ⃗J, but in this paper by ⃗j. This was
Figure 1 in Boozer, Nucl. Fusion55, 025001 (2015).
that
dI
dψt
= dIbs
dψt
+ dInet
dψt
+ Vℓ
µ0(G+ιI)η ,(2)
whereI=
R⃗j·d⃗ aφ is the toroidal current enclosed
by a magnetic surface,G=
R⃗j·d⃗ aθ is the current
upward through the central hole in a magnetic sur-
face, Figure 1, andι=dψ p/dψt is the rotational
transform. The currentsI bs andI cd are the total
bootstrap and the total externally driven current en-
closed by a magnetic surface.
Equations (1) and (2) are easiest to derive in what
are known as Boozer coordinates [4] in the stellarator
community, Figure 1:
2π⃗B= ⃗∇ψt×⃗∇θ+ ⃗∇φ× ⃗∇ψp(ψt,t).(3)
=µ 0G(ψt,t)⃗∇φ+µ 0I(ψt,t)⃗∇θ+β ∗⃗∇ψt.(4)
Boozer coordinates exist in the magnetic field of any
toroidal scalar-pressure plasma equilibrium. These
coordinates are well known among physicists work-
ing on stellarators since they are the basis of the op-
timization that led to the W7-X stellarator and the
modern stellarator program. The proof of Equation
(4) is non-trivial even in Boozer coordinates but is
given in [5].
Equations (1)) and (2) are coordinate independent
expressions. The failure to grasp their importance
presumably comes from the rarity of a mention of
the toroidal magnetic flux in the tokamak literature.
Instead of using the toroidal fluxψ t as the radial
coordinate, as is standard in the stellarator litera-
ture, the tokamak literature usesψ. The fluxψis
the natural solution to the Grad-Shafranov equation
but has a non-trivial relationship to the poloidal flux
ψp,
ψ≡Ψ ax
p −ψp,(5)
where Ψax
p (t) is the magnetic flux passing downward
through the region enclosed by the magnetic axis. A
rigorous discussion of the implications of Faraday’s
Law, the slippage of the poloidal fluxψ p relative to
the toroidal fluxψ t, is made subtle by the use of
ψas the radial coordinate and impossible when the
toroidal fluxψ t is ignored.
Although Equation (1) is non-trivial to prove, it is
trivially provable at the magnetic axis,ψ=0. At the
magnetic axis, the application of Stokes’ Theorem
to Faraday’s Law proves the time derivative of the
downward magnetic flux through the region enclosed
by the magnetic axis, Ψax
p , is given by
dΨax
p
dt =V ax
ℓ ; (6)
Vax
ℓ ≡
I
ax
⃗E·d ⃗ℓ.(7)
Even this trivially obvious expression implies
Ψax
p = Ψ sol
p + Ψpl
p ; (8)
Ψpl
p =−

Ψin
p + Ψex
p

,(9)
where Ψsol
p is the magnetic flux coming downward
through the central solenoid of a tokamak and Ψpl
p is
the poloidal flux going downward through the region
enclosed by the magnetic axis due to the plasma cur-
rent, Figure 2. The poloidal flux due to the plasma
current is conventionally negative and is the sum of
two parts. The part Ψ in
p gives the poloidal flux due
to the plasma current that lies within the plasma,
and Ψex
p is the part of the poloidal flux due to the
plasma current that lies outside of the plasma. Nor-
mally, Ψex
p is somewhat larger than Ψ in
p . The Nu-
clear Fusion paper [1], which was inspired by an
arXiv article [3], would have avoided many of its
errors had Figure 2, which was in the arXiv article,
not been ignored.
Richard Fitzpatrick’s 2026 Nuclear Fusion paper
on current ramp-up and ramp-down in tokamaks [1]
has all the confusions that would be expected from
basing the magnetic field evolution on the evolution
ofψand ignoringψ t. In addition, the paper entan-
gles a number of in-principle separable concepts and
2

FIG. 2: The lines of the poloidal magnetic field produced
by the toroidal plasma current are shown together with
the magnetic field produced by the central solenoid of a
tokamak.
made incorrect assumptions. The problems with his
Nuclear Fusion paper [1] are dealt with in [2], and
that paper should be consulted for details. Only a
summary of the problems and incorrect assumptions
are given here:
1. Did not mention the changes in the flux in the
central solenoid, Ψsol(t), which is the only flux
that is a directly controllable function of time.
2. Assumed the magnetic flux enclosed by the
axis is Ψax
p (t) can be effectively controlled, but
this flux is given by Equation (8) and deter-
mined by two terms, Equation (9), that are not
even discussed Ψsol
p (t) and Ψex
p , which is most
of the poloidal flux produced by the plasma
current.
3. Assumed a spatially constant loop voltage in
the plasma without explanation, which hap-
pens to be true [3].
4. Assumed a spatially constant loop volt-
age implies a profile of the magnetic field
Bθ(r,t)/B(a,t) that is independent of time
withathe plasma radius in the cylindrical
model that was used. This assumption is false.
When the plasma radiusais fixed, the con-
verse is true. WhenB θ(r,t)/B(a,t) is inde-
pendent of time, the loop voltage is spatially
constant. The bootstrap and driven currents
were assumed zero.
5. In the simple cylindrical model of [1],
Bθ(r,t)/B(a,t) andaindependent of time
would imply the current profileI(r,t)/I(a,t)
is independent of time. But, Equation (2) says
the current profile is dependent on the resistiv-
ityηprofile which depends on both the elec-
tron temperature and theZ eff profiles. Even
with a fixed impurity content,Z eff can be a
complicated function of the electron tempera-
ture.
6. The assumption of a temporally constant cur-
rent profile meant that if the initial plasma
was stable based on the 1987 study of TFTR
disruptions by Cheng, Furth, and Boozer [6],
which was used, the plasma would remain sta-
ble.
7. Assumed a time-independent and spatially-
constant profile of the thermal energy diffu-
sivity to calculate the electron temperature
and thatηj 2 was the only other term in
the power balance. These assumptions made
Te(r,t)/Te(0,t) independent of time, but ne-
glected the effects such as the loss of fusion
heating and the loss of the H-mode in a realis-
tic plasma model.
8. Non-spatially constant thermal diffusivities
were mentioned, which would have given dif-
ferentT e and henceI(r) profiles, but only
one current profile was considered and that
was assumed to be applicable to all current
profiles consistent with plasma cooling on the
timescale given by the spatially constant ther-
mal diffusivity. A remarkable extrapolation
was made that all ramp downs of similar speed
are stable. Only a limited range of current pro-
files are stable using the Cheng et al study [6].
9. Had no response to the sentence in the abstract
of [3]: “A deviation of the profile of the plasma
current over its full stability range produces
only a small change,∼16%, in the poloidal
flux produced by the plasma current. This of-
fers a simple explanation of why disruptions
in tokamaks are so common, and why current-
profile control though difficult seems to be re-
quired, especially during shutdown.”
The Nuclear Fusion paper [1] is a complicated in-
tertwining of confusions about Faraday’s Law, in-
valid assumptions, and incorrect approximations.
The paper considers only one current profile, which
appears to be stable, but this is not a credible argu-
ment for the robust stability against disruptions for
all realistic current profiles.
Two statements are obviously correct but not re-
flected in the analysis in the Nuclear Fusion paper
[1]: (1) The definition of the poloidal flux must in-
clude the solenoidal flux in order to represent its
induction effect. (2) The time derivative of the
poloidal flux is at a fixed toroidal flux not at a fixed
minor radiusr, as is obvious when the plasma is
shifted outward in major radiusRassuming an ideal
magnetic evolution. Confusion may arise because
3

these two statements are only implicit in standard
tokamak references.
With 1600 downloads, the errors in [1] may be
sufficiently subtle to confuse many people and not
just the usually reliable reviewers for the journals
Nuclear Fusion and Physics of Plasmas.
Whatever the correctness of [1] may be, the re-
viewers may have been lulled into acceptance from
knowledge of results based on codes that study mag-
netic induction in tokamaks. These codes have un-
dergone decades of development and testing against
thousands of tokamaks discharges on an extremely
large range of device sizes, plasma temperatures, and
engineering designs. But, this seems unlikely.
If these codes were adequate for designing toka-
maks that are sufficiently disruption free for prac-
tical fusion power, it should be possible to de-
termine how JET-ILW should have been operated
to have high-performance disruption-free plasmas.
This would show the naivete of the concerns of Ei-
dietis [7] and of the statement in [8]: “It may be ex-
pected that a disruption free space may be defined
in theℓ i−q 95 empirical stability diagram, assuming
that plasma current profiles tend to maintain itself
inside the permissible values. In reality, the JET-
ILW pre-disruptive plasma equilibrium parameters
create a diffused cloud on theℓ i−q 95 stability dia-
gram without room for non-disruptive plasmas.”
An easier task for the codes would be the iden-
tification of parameters that can be monitored and
controlled in a fusion power plant that would ensure
a sufficiently low disruption rate. Even that seems
too ambitious. The paperARC disruption physics
and strategy[9] displays little confidence in the use
of existing codes to ensure disruption avoidance and
focused on disruption mitigation instead. The inex-
plicability of the acceptance of the results of [1] raises
concerns about the reliability of other assessments.
###SECTION###
III. MISQUOTING ISSUES
The scientific issues with the Nuclear Fusion arti-
cle [1] are now adequately dealt with in my Physics
of Plasmas paper [2]. What is not dealt with are the
false statements about my arXiv article that were
buttressed by “private communication” references in
the Nuclear fusion paper [1]. The Nuclear Fusion
policy of allowing false statements to be buttressed
by “private communication” references but not al-
lowing any mention of a “private communication”
to refute those false statements left this arXiv pub-
lication as the only channel for refuting them.
If Fitzpatrick had just ignored the “private com-
munication” emails, that would have been irrespon-
sible. But, Richard coupled his references to my
arXiv article and his references to “private commu-
nication” everywhere except in the Abstract to rein-
force his claim to be correcting a false view of mine.
A particularly clear example of a misquote that
went against an email exchange was in the abstract
to the Nuclear Fusion paper [1]: “Hence, there is
no indication that the design ramp times are infea-
sible, as was recently suggested in Boozer [2].” My
August 13, 2025 email, which was before August 18
when the the Nuclear Fusion paper [1] was submit-
ted: “Actually I didn’t really mean the expected
ramp down time was 1000 sec, and it would take
a lot of power to keep the plasma going. What I
was trying to indicate is that a large cooling of the
plasma is necessary but the profile had to remain rel-
atively fixed while doing that ramp down. I agree my
words were confusing, and they have been changed.”
Fitzpatrick responded: “Would it be accurate to say
that you think that the ramp-down times are longer
than the SPARC and ITER people are claiming” My
response: “The primary issues are the energy and
magnetic flux input into the plasma that is required
during a shutdown to ensure the current profile does
not slip into a disruptive state more than one time in
at least a thousand shut-downs. A major problem in
my view, is that a 20% change in the poloidal flux
distribution is sufficient to take a plasma far from
a state as far as possible from a disruption into a
disruption. This means a disruption can occur in
approximately a fifth of the time one would expect
a flattop to last.”
Despite my statement, “I agree my words were
confusing, and they have been changed,” which was
an effort to be polite, the basis of Fitzpatrck’s con-
fusion is unclear. Two quotes from the first arXiv
version my article stated: (1) “In principle, the
restart period can be made arbitrarily short by
clever choices of the time dependence of Ψsol(t) and
the heating power. Of course, the periods in which
substantial heating power is required must be short
compared to the periods of fusion burn to have net
energy to sell.” (2) ”A rapid cooling of the central
part of the plasma seems required, but unless this is
done with care, the current profile will evolve into a
disruptive state.”
The last “private communication” that Fitz-
patrick and I had before the publication of his pa-
per was on 9-10 September 2025, which was before
he submitted his revised version of his article, 25
September 2025, the version that was accepted. This
communication illustrates our different perceptions
of physics issues. I wrote on September 9: “The con-
fusions on the important points in my arXiv article
‘Constraints on the magnetic field evolution in toka-
mak power plants’ were convincing that the abstract
and introduction had to be rewritten. Any com-
4

ments are appreciated, especially ones on balance
and fair quoting.” Fitzpatrick’s September 10 re-
sponse: “I do not really agree that tokamak plasma
are “self-organized”. When I think of the term self-
organized, I naturally think of an RFP plasma. Such
plasmas are subject to continuous large-amplitude
m=1 and m=0 tearing modes. It is these modes that
relax the plasma toward a Taylor state. However, a
tokamak plasma is quiescent. There are no large
amplitude tearing modes, and the equilibrium pro-
files are determined by transport rather than MHD
activity. The only exception is the sawtooth oscil-
lation, which periodically generates a short burst of
MHD activity that prevents the central q value from
falling significantly below unity. Given that q(0) is
pinned to a value close to unity, and q(a) is fixed
by the plasma current, the average broadness of the
current profile is easily controlled. Experimentalists
have also become adept at further tailoring the cur-
rent profile by means of off-axis heating. It is not
true that there is an inevitable drift to a disruptive
state in a tokamak plasma. In fact, tokamak dis-
charges could be maintained indefinitely were it not
for the limit in the flux-swing of the central solenoid,
and the gradual build up of impurities.”
Fitzpatrick’s response reads as if disruptions can
be easily avoided by a competent machine operator.
Ensuring tokamaks have a sufficiently low disrup-
tion rate for the economic feasibility of power plants
is non-trivial and requires improved understanding
[7]. Ensuring disruptions are sufficiently rare for the
feasibility of tokamak power plants would seem to
require the identification of the externally control-
lable plasma parameters that show the plasma is
safe against disruptions. This requirement is more
stringent in power plants than in existing tokamaks
or in JET because of the limitations on diagnostics
and actuators. Generative AI using data from both
experiments and simulations could help in this iden-
tification.
###SECTION###
Appendix A: The Loop V oltage
This appendix will derive a new and simple ex-
pression for the loop voltage, which has the general-
ity of the parallel Ohm’s Law. The definition of the
loop voltage, which has the certainty of Faraday’s
Law when applied to toroidal plasmas, is [5]
Vℓ(ψt,t)≡lim
L→∞
RL
0
⃗E·d ⃗ℓ
RL
0
⃗∇
  φ
2π

·d⃗ℓ
;,(A1)
whered⃗ℓis the differential distance along a magnetic
field line. Using Ohm’s law, the electric field parallel
to the magnetic field isE || =η

j||−j bs−j cd

.
Both the bootstrap current density ⃗jbs =j bs⃗B/B
and the current density due to direct current drive
⃗jcd =j cd⃗B/Bare defined to be divergence free.
Following a discussion in a paper on the Pfirsch-
Schl¨ uter current [10], the contravariant and covari-
ant representations of the magnetic field in Boozer
coordinates, Equations (3 ) and (4 ), can be rewrit-
ten at an arbitrary point in time as
2π⃗B= ⃗∇ψt×⃗∇θ0; (A2)
=µ 0(G+ιI) ⃗∇φ+µ 0I⃗∇θ0 +Bψt
⃗∇ψt; (A3)
ι≡ dψp
dψt
; (A4)
θ0 =θ−ιφ.(A5)
Sinced⃗ℓis the differential distance along a magnetic
field line
∂⃗ x(ψt,θ 0,ℓ)
∂ℓ =
⃗B
B and (A6)
⃗B· ∂⃗ x
∂ℓ =B,and using Eq. (A3) (A7)
=

µ0(G+ιI)
∂φ
∂ℓ

ψtθ0
.(A8)
The implication is that the loop voltage is
Vℓ =µ 0(G+ιI)η
 dI
dψt
− dIbs
dψt
− dIcd
dψt

.(A9)
The parallel current ⃗j|| ≡j ||⃗B/Bis not diver-
gence free,j || =j ps +j net. The Pfirsch-Schl¨ uter
current density has a divergence that balances the
divergence of the perpendicular current density that
is determined by the pressure gradient,⃗j⊥×⃗B= ⃗∇p.
The Pfirsch-Schl¨ uter current is defined to obey the
constraint
lim
N→∞
R 2πN
0
jps
B dφ
R 2πN
0 dφ
= 0.(A10)
The net plasma current density is by definiion diver-
gence free, which impliesj net/Bis constant along a
field line, and is given byj net/B=dI/dψ t, where
I(ψt) is the toroidal current enclosed by a magnetic
surface,I≡
R⃗j·d⃗ aφ, Figure 1.
5

[1] R. Fitzpatrick,A Simple Model of Current Ramp-
Up and Ramp-Down in Tokamaks, Nuclear Fusion
66, 016012 (2026); doi: 10.1088/1741-4326/ae1308.
[2] A. H. Boozer,Constraints on the magnetic field evo-
lution in tokamak power plants, Phys. Plasmas33,
082507 (2026); doi: 10.1063/5.0322714.
[3] A. H. Boozer,Constraints on the magnetic
field evolution in tokamak power plants,
arXiv:2507.05456v5 [physics.plasm-ph]

(Sept.
2025).
[4] A. H. Boozer,Plasma equilibrium with rational
magnetic surfaces, Phys. Fluids24, 1999 (1981);
doi: 10.1063/1.863297.
[5] A. H. Boozer,Physics of magnetically confined
plasmas, Rev. Mod. Phys.76, 1071 (2004); doi
10.1103/RevModPhys.76.1071.
[6] C Z Cheng, H P Furth and A H Boozer,MHD
stable regime of the Tokamak, Plasma Phys. Con-
trol. Fusion29351 (1987); doi 10.1088/0741-
3335/29/3/006.
[7] N. Eidietis,Prospects for Disruption Handling in a
Tokamak-based Fusion Reactor, Fusion Sci. Technol.
77, 732 (2021); doi 10.1080/15361055.2021.1889919.
[8] S.N. Gerasimov, P. Abreu, G. Artaserse, M.
Baruzzo, P. Buratti, I.S. Carvalho, I.H. Coffey, E.
De La Luna, T.C. Hender, R.B. Henriques, R. Fel-
ton, S. Jachmich, U. Kruezi9, P.J. Lomas, P. Mc-
Cullen, M. Maslov, E. Matveeva1, S. Moradi, L.
Piron, F.G. Rimini, W. Schippers, C. Stuart, G.
Szepesi, M. Tsalas, D. Valcarcel1, L.E. Zakharov,
and JET Contributors,Overview of disruptions with
JET-ILW, Nucl. Fusion60, 066028, (2020); doi:
10.1088/1741-4326/ab87b0.
[9] R. Sweeney, V. Riccardo, A. Braun, C. Clauser, A.
Creely, T. Eich, I. Ekmark, A. Feyrer, C. Hansen,
J. C. Hillesheim, T. Looby, S. Ratynskaia, R.
Schramm, R. A. Tinguely, H. Wu, J. Boguski, M. D.
Boyer, J. Carmichael, A. Carter, R. Datta, T¨ unde
F¨ ul¨ op, R. Granetz, S. Guizzo, M. Hoppe, A. LeVi-
ness, A. Nelson, K. Paschalidis, C. Paz-Soldan, I.
Pusztai, C. Rea, T. Rizzi, A. R. Saperstein, P. B.
Snyder, B. Stein-Lubrano, and P Tolias,ARC dis-
ruption physics and strategy, J. Plasma Phys.92,
E68 (2026); doi: doi:10.1017/S0022377826101585.
[10] A. H. Boozer,Pfirsch-Schl¨ uter Current,
<https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.21637>.
6